# CalHabMap_FishCSVI
In 2015, a large Harmful Algal Bloom event known as "the Blob" led to the closure of Dungeness Crab fisheries in the coastal states of Washington, Oregon, and California. Other related events were increased deaths of seabirds, marine mammals, other local fish species. Harmful Algal Bloom events are characterized by rapid growth, followed by rapid decay of aquatic cyanobacteria. This rapid change in biomass has ecological impacts on the ecosystem, with the potential for human health risks. In the case of California, the most common Harmful Algal Bloom species group is Pseudo-nitzchia. A byproduct of rapid growth and decay of Pseudo-nitzchia is domoic acid, which is known to cause death in marine mammals and birds. It is also the cause of Amensic Shellfish poisoning in humans, as domoic acid is a biotoxin that accumulates in fish and shellfish. 

With recent climate change and nutrient pollution issues, Harmful Algal Blooms have become recognized as a national threat by Congress (HABHRCA 2018). Following the Blob event of 2015, NOAA has conducted many socio-economic and socio-cultural studies about the impacts of Harmful Algal Blooms on West Coast fishing communities. Given the importance of Harmful Algal Blooms, we develop three research questions: 1) what chemical, geographical, and physical factors set the stage for harmful algal bloom events, 2) are harmful algal blooms increasing over time, and 3) where are the fishing communities in areas with high concentrations of HAB's.

The data used to to answer the first two questions are sourced from the regional HAB monitoring system of California, which is managed by the Southern, Central and Northern California Observing System. At seven locations, weekly sampling is conducted to measure concentrations of different nutrients, sea surface temperature, salinity, and several algae species. 

